<!--
title: Music
-->
I make electronic music under the name Alternative Cosmetics and played in a
bunch of bands of various disquality (shout out to the other guys from "Band
zonder talent" :-).

You can listen to my EP "Mood of the leopard" on
[Jamendo](https://www.jamendo.com/album/60375/mood-of-the-leopard) where it has
ammassed more than 160k listens at the time of writing (not sure how that
happened). 

I have also created an EP ["Exhumed but not
dead"](https://www.jamendo.com/album/168049/exhumed-but-not-dead) featuring
mixes of old tracks I made in the 90's. 

You can also catch me on
[SoundCloud](https://soundcloud.com/alternative-cosmetics) and there's an old
[Myspace account](https://myspace.com/alternativecosmetics/music/songs)
gathering cobwebs.

I've been making music since the mid-90's, using Fast Tracker II to create
horrible Euro Dance before turning to other tools in which I could do even more
damage. In 2010 I recorded my first EP and put it on Jamendo. The song "Space"
got played on [Rathole Radio](http://ratholeradio.org/2010/02/ep19/) (Yay!) and
featured on the Software Freedom Day cd that year. 

Electronics are all nice and dandy, but recently I mostly play blues piano. I
might make some reordings at some point, but don't hold your breath :-).


Mood of the leopard
-------------------

<iframe width="100%" height="600" scrolling="no" frameborder="no"
src="https://w.soundcloud.com/player/?url=https%3A//api.soundcloud.com/playlists/695958&amp;auto_play=false&amp;hide_related=false&amp;show_comments=true&amp;show_user=true&amp;show_reposts=false&amp;visual=true"></iframe>

Fast Tracker II songs
---------------------

<iframe width="300" height="90"
src="//media.myspace.com/play/song/movement-41428092-44039741" frameborder="0"
allowtransparency="true" webkitallowfullscreen mozallowfullscreen
allowfullscreen></iframe>

<iframe width="300" height="90"
src="//media.myspace.com/play/song/apocalypse-50739769-54683590" frameborder="0"
allowtransparency="true" webkitallowfullscreen mozallowfullscreen
allowfullscreen></iframe>
