<!--
title: The kind optimism of Games Done Quick
categories: random_thoughts, english
-->
Last Sunday marked the end of another [Awesome Games Done
Quick](https://gamesdonequick.com/): a weeklong speedrunning fundraising
extravaganza benefiting charity. I absolutely loved it! If you don't know GDQ
I'll summarize it for you: GDQ is a round the clock 7 day long event streamed
on Twitch featuring a cast of great, funny gamers and commentators celebrating
both old and new games while trying to finish them as quickly as possible. In
the meantime people can donate and there's a number of sweepstakes and
incentives to try to generate as much money as possible for charity. There's
two main versions of GDQ, with AGDQ in the winter supporting the Prevent Cancer
Foundation and a summer version aptly named Summer Games Done Quick that helps
Médecins Sans Frontières. I have been watching both AGDQ and SGDQ for years
and donate each time.

All nice and great of course, who doesn't love a nice fundraising event? The
thing that strikes me most however is the unique ambiance of GDQ. Online events
can quickly turn sour and a bit nasty. They are incredibly hard to make nice
and warm, but the speedrunning community is really something special and paired
with the great folks behind GDQ they have made something truly remarkable. Both
the runners, the commentators on the couch behind them and the announcers on
the mic are very sweet, kind and polite and you can see that GDQ goes at
lengths to try to be as inclusive as possible.  The crowd you see in the back
resembles that and so do the speedrunners. You see a broad slice of geek
culture in the crowd and I adore it.

This year I especially enjoyed Lizstar's run of the horrible DOS game Mega Man
3: The Robots are Revolting in appalling but nostalgic CGA colors :-). This was
part of the Awful Games Done Quick block, which is my favorite. This is often
the most hilarious part of the whole marathon, however you can't help but
notice the sincere love many of the speedrunners in this block feel for these
games, how horrible they may be. I guess playing a game for so many hours makes
you grow fond of it however bad it may be.

Another great run in the awful block was the 3DO survival horror game Doctor
Hauzer. If you're into making games like me and worry about frame drops, this
slideshow of a game will definitely put things into perspective :-).

I also really enjoyed the Final Fantasy VIII run. I liked it so much that I
bought the game immediately afterwards. The run was also timed perfectly for my
work day.  I had a relatively light day planned with a lot of server
maintenance and small feature requests and the run fit perfectly in this
schedule. So while doing updates to my servers I could watch this 8+ hours
co-op relay run in the background. The immense expertise of the runners and
their in-depth knowledge of all nooks and crannies of the game and its lore was
wonderful.

The closing game was Super Metroid, which is pretty common for an AGDQ, however
this time it featured a gruesome ROM hack called Super Metroid Impossible and I
can tell you that it really deserves its name. It was pretty amazing to see the
runner Oatsngoats actually finish it and with that also concluding AGDQ 2020,
having collected more than 3 million dollars for the PCF. Yay!
